📝 Docs (#114)
cda-tum/qmap: docs/source/Mapping.rst

Quantum Circuit Mapping
=======================

> Quantum computing architectures often provide only limited connectivity between physical qubits, meaning that two-qubit gates can not be executed with arbitrary qubits. Quantum algorithms are usually developed and implemented without device-specific restrictions in mind. Before running a quantum circuit on a quantum computer the circuit needs to be *mapped*. This involves *qubit allocation* where logical qubits are assigned to physical qubits in an *initial layout* and *routing* where the original circuit is amended with SWAP gates such that it adheres to the target device's *coupling map*.

Author: Used your version.

        qc = QuantumCircuit(4)
        qc.h(0)
        qc.cx(0, 1)
        qc.cx(0, 2)
        qc.cx(0, 3)

        qc.barrier()

        qc.t(0)
        qc.t(1)
        qc.t(2)
        qc.t(3)

        qc.barrier()

        qc.cx(0, 3)
        qc.cx(0, 2)
        qc.cx(0, 1)

        qc.measure_all()

        print(qc.draw(fold=-1))

    .. code-block:: console

              ┌───┐                ░ ┌───┐ ░                 ░ ┌─┐
         q_0: ┤ H ├──■────■────■───░─┤ T ├─░───■────■────■───░─┤M├─────────
              └───┘┌─┴─┐  │    │   ░ ├───┤ ░   │    │  ┌─┴─┐ ░ └╥┘┌─┐
         q_1: ─────┤ X ├──┼────┼───░─┤ T ├─░───┼────┼──┤ X ├─░──╫─┤M├──────
                   └───┘┌─┴─┐  │   ░ ├───┤ ░   │  ┌─┴─┐└───┘ ░  ║ └╥┘┌─┐
         q_2: ──────────┤ X ├──┼───░─┤ T ├─░───┼──┤ X ├──────░──╫──╫─┤M├───
                        └───┘┌─┴─┐ ░ ├───┤ ░ ┌─┴─┐└───┘      ░  ║  ║ └╥┘┌─┐
         q_3: ───────────────┤ X ├─░─┤ T ├─░─┤ X ├───────────░──╫──╫──╫─┤M├
                             └───┘ ░ └───┘ ░ └───┘           ░  ║  ║  ║ └╥┘
      meas: 4/══════════════════════════════════════════════════╩══╩══╩══╩═
                                                          0  1  2  3

> Now assume this circuit shall be mapped to a 4-qubit architecture with the following coupling map:

Author: Done

> Now assume this circuit shall be mapped to a 4-qubit architecture with the following coupling map:

Author: Done

> .. image:: /images/linear_arch_4-1.png

Author: Done

   :width: 80%

>    :alt: 4-qubit Architecture

Author: Not anymore :)

   :align: center

In *QMAP* this architecture can be manually defined.

    .. code-block:: python3

>         arch = qmap.Architecture(4, set([(0, 1), (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 2), (2, 1), (1, 0)]))

Author: No particular reason. Used the "canonic" version now

> The quantum circuit :code:`qc` can not be run directly on this architecture. Naive mapping yields the following possible compiled circuit.

Author: done.

    .. code-block:: console

                      ┌───┐                      ░ ┌───┐ ░                       ░ ┌─┐
	  q_0 -> q_0: ┤ H ├──■───X───────────────░─┤ T ├─░───────────────X───■───░─┤M├─────────
	              └───┘┌─┴─┐ │               ░ ├───┤ ░               │ ┌─┴─┐ ░ └╥┘┌─┐
	  q_1 -> q_1: ─────┤ X ├─X───■───X───────░─┤ T ├─░───────X───■───X─┤ X ├─░──╫─┤M├──────
	                   └───┘   ┌─┴─┐ │       ░ ├───┤ ░       │ ┌─┴─┐   └───┘ ░  ║ └╥┘┌─┐
	  q_2 -> q_2: ─────────────┤ X ├─X───■───░─┤ T ├─░───■───X─┤ X ├─────────░──╫──╫─┤M├───
	                           └───┘   ┌─┴─┐ ░ ├───┤ ░ ┌─┴─┐   └───┘         ░  ║  ║ └╥┘┌─┐
	  q_3 -> q_3: ─────────────────────┤ X ├─░─┤ T ├─░─┤ X ├─────────────────░──╫──╫──╫─┤M├
	                                   └───┘ ░ └───┘ ░ └───┘                 ░  ║  ║  ║ └╥┘
	      meas: 4/══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╩══╩══╩══╩═

>                                                                                     0  1  2  3

Reviewer: I am not quite sure if the indentation here is right. at least GitHub displays it in a weird fashion.

Author: Typical case where Tabs will ruin your life.

> This mapping uses 4 SWAPs. As every SWAP decomposes into 3 CNOT gates, this is a very costly overhead for such a small circuit.

Author: Done.

> Minimizing the number of additional gates introduced by mapping a quantum circuit is precisely the job of *QMAP*.

Reviewer: Here, the corresponding citation for the NP-hardness would also be nice.

> Minimizing the number of additional gates introduced by mapping a quantum circuit is precisely the job of *QMAP*.

Reviewer: Also, the reference to our papers should probably be added here. Maybe something like `(based on [1, 2])`

> Minimizing the number of additional gates introduced by mapping a quantum circuit is precisely the job of *QMAP*.

Author: Now also done.

Exact Mapping
#############

> The *exact mapper* implemented in *QMAP* maps quantum circuits using the *minimal* number of SWAP gates. For directional architectures it furthermore tries to minimize the number of additional Hadamard gates. Using the exact mapper is as simple as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *exact mapper* implemented in *QMAP* maps quantum circuits using the *minimal* number of SWAP gates.
To this end, it encodes the mapping task as a MaxSAT problem and subsequently solves it using the `SMT solver Z3 <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>`_. Due to the NP-hardness of the mapping task, this approach is only scalable up to roughly eight qubits in most scenarios.

.. note::
    On directional architectures, it can be significantly cheaper to surround a CNOT gate with four Hadamard operations (effectively exchanging its control and target) instead of adding a SWAP gate. For these architectures, QMAP minimizes the number of additional SWAP *and* H gates.

Using the exact mapper is as simple as:
```

Author: Done

    .. code-block:: python3

        qc_mapped, res = qmap.compile(qc, arch, method="exact")

        print(qc_mapped.draw(fold=-1))

        print("Additional gates: %d" % res.json()["statistics"]["additional_gates"])

> 	print("Additional SWAPs: %d" % res.json()['statistics']['swaps'])

Reviewer: indentation seems to be messed up here

Author: Guess it is done.

> 	print("Additional SWAPs: %d" % res.json()['statistics']['swaps'])

Reviewer: It might be misleading to print both the number of SWAPs and the number of additional gates here, if the respective numbers don't really match up, i.e., `#gates != 3 * #swaps`.
Consider only listing the number of additional gates.

Author: Agreed. Now only additional gates are listed.

        print("Runtime:          %f" % res.json()['statistics']['mapping_time'])

    .. code-block:: console

		                     ┌───┐┌───┐┌───┐     ┌─┐
	q_3 -> 0 ────────────────────┤ X ├┤ T ├┤ X ├─────┤M├───────────────────
	                        ┌───┐└─┬─┘├───┤└─┬─┘┌───┐└╥┘          ┌─┐
	q_2 -> 1 ────────────■──┤ X ├──■──┤ T ├──■──┤ X ├─╫───■───────┤M├──────
	         ┌───┐     ┌─┴─┐└─┬─┘┌───┐└───┘     └─┬─┘ ║ ┌─┴─┐     └╥┘┌─┐
	q_0 -> 2 ┤ H ├──■──┤ X ├──■──┤ T ├────────────■───╫─┤ X ├──■───╫─┤M├───
	         └───┘┌─┴─┐├───┤     └───┘                ║ └───┘┌─┴─┐ ║ └╥┘┌─┐
	q_1 -> 3 ─────┤ X ├┤ T ├──────────────────────────╫──────┤ X ├─╫──╫─┤M├
	              └───┘└───┘                          ║      └───┘ ║  ║ └╥┘
	    c: 4/═════════════════════════════════════════╩════════════╩══╩══╩═
	                                                  3            2  0  1
	Additional gates: 2

> 	Additional SWAPs: 2

Reviewer: I think this block needs to be indented a level further.

Author: Done

>         Runtime:          0.015844

Reviewer: indentation is messed up here.

Author: Do you mean the value of "Runtime"? Because that is indented to be aligned with the other values on purpose.

Author: Should be fixed now.

> Not only does this solution yield less SWAPs, by default the :code:`compile` method optimizes SWAP gates in a post-processing step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the :code:`compile` method optimizes sequences of CNOTs preceded/followed by SWAP gates in a post-processing step.
As a result, *no* SWAP gates are needed at all for mapping the circuit. Instead, only two additional CNOT operations are necessary to map the circuit.
```

Author: Done.

> 

Reviewer: This could probably use a subsection to talk about search space limitations and refer to the corresponding paper. If you feel comfortable writing that, go for it. If not, let's create an issue for that and tag Sarah in it, as she is the author of that paper.

Author: Completely agree. Didn't do it on purpose because I don't feel comfortable writing about it. Gonna make it an issue.

Reviewer: Sounds good. I'll resolve once the issues are created.

Heuristic Mapping
#################

> Finding an optimal mapping for a quantum circuit is an NP-hard problem. *QMAP* employs the `SMT solver Z3 <https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3>`_ to encode and solve the problem of finding an optimal mapping as a Boolean formula. This, of course, brings scalablity issues along with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This belongs in the previous section. I tried to incorporate it there.

Author: Done.

> The *heuristic mapper* implemented in *QMAP* provides an alternative approach to quantum circuit mapping that trades off quality of the mapping result against runtime. Using the heuristic mapper works completely analogous to the exact mapper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *heuristic mapper* implemented in *QMAP* uses A\*-search to efficiently traverse the immense search space of the mapping problem.
It effectively trades optimality for runtime.
This allows to reliably determine suitable mappings for circuits with up to hundreds of qubits.

Using the heuristic mapper works completely analogous to the exact mapper.
```

Author: Done.

        print(qc_mapped.draw(fold=-1))

        print("Additional gates: %d" % res.json()["statistics"]["additional_gates"])
        print("Additional SWAPs: %d" % res.json()["statistics"]["swaps"])
        print("Runtime:          %f" % res.json()["statistics"]["mapping_time"])

    .. code-block:: console

	         ┌───┐┌───┐     ┌───┐                              ┌───┐   ┌─┐
	q_0 -> 0 ┤ H ├┤ X ├──■──┤ T ├──────────────────────────────┤ X ├───┤M├
	         └───┘└─┬─┘┌─┴─┐├───┤     ┌───┐               ┌───┐└─┬─┘┌─┐└╥┘
	q_1 -> 1 ───────■──┤ X ├┤ X ├──■──┤ T ├────────────■──┤ X ├──■──┤M├─╫─
	                   └───┘└─┬─┘┌─┴─┐└───┘┌───┐     ┌─┴─┐└─┬─┘ ┌─┐ └╥┘ ║
	q_2 -> 2 ─────────────────■──┤ X ├──■──┤ T ├──■──┤ X ├──■───┤M├──╫──╫─
	                             └───┘┌─┴─┐├───┤┌─┴─┐└┬─┬┘      └╥┘  ║  ║
	q_3 -> 3 ─────────────────────────┤ X ├┤ T ├┤ X ├─┤M├────────╫───╫──╫─
	                                  └───┘└───┘└───┘ └╥┘        ║   ║  ║
	    c: 4/══════════════════════════════════════════╩═════════╩═══╩══╩═
	                                                   3         2   0  1
	Additional gates: 3
	Additional SWAPs: 3

>         Runtime:          0.000065

Reviewer: indentation is messed up here

Author: Same question as above.

> While this solution is not optimal anymore it only requires one more gate and even for such a small example the heuristic mapper is orders of magnitudes faster than the exact mapper.

Reviewer: Also here a subsection about using teleportation in the heuristic mapper and referring to the respective paper would make sense. As above, if you feel comfortable to write such a section, go for it. If not, let's create an issue for that and tag Stefan in it, as he is the author of that paper.

Author: Same as above, gonna make it an issue.

Reviewer: Sounds good. I'll resolve once the issues are created.

Author: Created the issue.

        qc.t(1)
        qc.t(2)
        qc.t(3)

        qc.barrier()

        qc.cx(0, 3)
        qc.cx(0, 2)
        qc.cx(0, 1)

        qc.measure_all()

        print(qc.draw(fold=-1))

    .. code-block:: console

               ┌───┐                ░ ┌───┐ ░                 ░ ┌─┐
          q_0: ┤ H ├──■────■────■───░─┤ T ├─░───■────■────■───░─┤M├─────────
               └───┘┌─┴─┐  │    │   ░ ├───┤ ░   │    │  ┌─┴─┐ ░ └╥┘┌─┐
          q_1: ─────┤ X ├──┼────┼───░─┤ T ├─░───┼────┼──┤ X ├─░──╫─┤M├──────
                    └───┘┌─┴─┐  │   ░ ├───┤ ░   │  ┌─┴─┐└───┘ ░  ║ └╥┘┌─┐
          q_2: ──────────┤ X ├──┼───░─┤ T ├─░───┼──┤ X ├──────░──╫──╫─┤M├───
                         └───┘┌─┴─┐ ░ ├───┤ ░ ┌─┴─┐└───┘      ░  ║  ║ └╥┘┌─┐
          q_3: ───────────────┤ X ├─░─┤ T ├─░─┤ X ├───────────░──╫──╫──╫─┤M├
                              └───┘ ░ └───┘ ░ └───┘           ░  ║  ║  ║ └╥┘
       meas: 4/══════════════════════════════════════════════════╩══╩══╩══╩═
                                                           0  1  2  3

Now assume this circuit shall be mapped to a 4-qubit architecture defined by the following coupling map:

.. image:: /images/linear_arch.svg
   :width: 80%

>    :alt: 5-qubit Architecture

Reviewer: this still says 5 qubits 🙃

Author: God dammit. My bad

   :align: center

> 

Reviewer: in the actual documentation the whitespace below the image kind of seems too small. I am not quite sure whether this can be changed easily. Feel free to ignore this. Just looks kind of weird.

Author: Also took notice of it. I'll try to find a quick fix

Author: Alright, so inserting a "|" (vertical bar) does the job

          q_3 -> q_3: ─────────────────────┤ X ├─░─┤ T ├─░─┤ X ├─────────────────░──╫──╫──╫─┤M├
                                           └───┘ ░ └───┘ ░ └───┘                 ░  ║  ║  ║ └╥┘
              meas: 4/══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╩══╩══╩══╩═
                                                                                    0  1  2  3

Over the course of the mapping, *four* SWAP gates have been introduce to satisfy the connectivity constraints of the device's architecture.
Since every additional gate increases the probability of errors, this is a very costly overhead for such a small circuit.

Keeping the number of additionally introduced gates as small as possible is key for ensuring the successful execution of the quantum circuit. Finding an optimal mapping for a quantum circuit is an NP-hard problem :cite:labelpar:`boteaComplexityQuantumCircuit2018`.
*QMAP* offers two dedicated techniques for tackling that problem:
- An *exact* mapping approach (based on :cite:labelpar:`willeMappingQuantumCircuits2019, burgholzer2022limitingSearchSpace`) that guarantees (gate-optimal) solutions and is typically suitable for up to 8 qubits.

> - A *heuristic* mapping approach (based on :cite:labelpar:`zulehnerEfficientMethodologyMapping2019, hillmichExlpoitingQuantumTeleportation2021`) that allows to determine efficient mapping solutions in a scalable fashion for up to hundreds of qubits.

Reviewer: for some reason the link previews for the second citation in `[3, 4]` and `[5, 6]`do not work properly in the docs. maybe split these into separate citations, i.e., `[3], [4]`.

Author: Done
